Scope
-----

The :ref:`Scope <scope>` defines the boundaries of the :ref:`procedure <procedure>` — what it covers, what it excludes, and who it applies to. This section ensures that users understand the exact context and applicability of the :ref:`Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) <standard_operating_procedure_sop>`, preventing misuse or misinterpretation. It should clearly specify the data types, sequencing platforms, and analytical :ref:`processes <process>` that are included, as well as any limitations or exclusions.

For bioinformatics SOPs, the scope may include details such as:

- **Assays or workflows covered:** Specify which assays, organisms, or sequencing workflows are addressed (e.g. HIV drug resistance pipeline, *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* lineage typing).

- **Data type and platform:** Define accepted data formats (e.g. FASTQ, BAM, VCF) and sequencing technologies (e.g. Illumina, Oxford Nanopore, PacBio).

- **Processes included:** Outline which analysis steps are covered (e.g. read QC, read mapping, *de novo* assembly, variant calling, annotation, report generation etc.).

- **Exclusions:** Explicitly state what is not included e.g. wet-lab preparation.

- **Intended users:** Identify the personnel authorised to perform the procedure.

- **System or context:** Note if the procedure forms part of a larger workflow (e.g. integrated within a national pathogen genomics service).


.. dropdown:: 💡 Example: HIV Antiviral Resistance Pipeline
   :open:

   The scope of this SOP is limited to the bioinformatics analysis of HIV genomic data for the purpose of predicting antiviral resistance. It covers the computational analysis of paired-end FASTQ files generated by Illumina NextSeq sequencing (2×150 bp reads). Processes include sequence quality control, de novo assembly, polishing, genome annotation, and antiviral resistance scoring for clinical HIV samples.

   Wet-lab sample preparation and sequencing are outside the scope of this document. Sequences generated using Oxford Nanopore Technologies or PacBio are not included in this SOP; only Illumina-based sequencing data are covered.

   This SOP applies to trained bioinformatics personnel performing validated analyses within the clinical diagnostics service.
